sonnet a
when in the chronicle of wasted time
i see descriptions of the fairest wights
and beauty making beautiful old rhyme
in praise of ladies dead and lovely knights
then in the blazon of sweet beautys best
of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow
i see their antique pen would have expressd
even such a beauty as you master now.
so all their praises are but prophecies
of this our time all you prefiguring
and for they lookd but with divining eyes
they had not skill enough your worth to sing
for we which now behold these present days
had eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise.

sonnet b
when my love swears that she is made of truth
i do believe her though i know she lies
that she might think me some untutord youth
unlearned in the worlds false subtleties.
thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young
although she knows my days are past the best
simply i credit her false speaking tongue
on both sides thus is simple truth suppressd.
but wherefore says she not she is unjust
and wherefore say not i that i am old
o loves best habit is in seeming trust
and age in love loves not to have years told
therefore i lie with her and she with me
and in our faults by lies we flatterd be.

sonnet c
from you have i been absent in the spring
when proud-pied april dressd in all his trim
hath put a spirit of youth in every thing
that heavy saturn laughd and leapd with him.
yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
of different flowers in odour and in hue
could make me any summers story tell
or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew
nor did i wonder at the lilys white
nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose
they were but sweet but figures of delight
drawn after you you pattern of all those.
yet seemd it winter still and you away
as with your shadow i with these did play.

sonnet d
when in disgrace with fortune and mens eyes
i all alone beweep my outcast state
and trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries
and look upon myself and curse my fate
wishing me like to one more rich in hope
featurd like him like him with friends possessd
desiring this mans art and that mans scope
with what i most enjoy contented least
yet in these thoughts myself almost despising
haply i think on thee and then my state
like to the lark at break of day arising
from sullen earth sings hymns at heavens gate
for thy sweet love rememberd such wealth brings
that then i scorn to change my state with kings.

sonnet e
mine eye hath playd the painter and hath stelld
thy beautys form in table of my heart
my body is the frame wherein tis held
and perspective it is the painters art.
for through the painter must you see his skill
to find where your true image pictured lies
which in my bosoms shop is hanging still
that hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done
mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me
are windows to my breast where-through the sun
delights to peep to gaze therein on thee
yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
they draw but what they see know not the heart.

sonnet f
so now i have confessd that he is thine
and i myself am mortgaged to thy will
myself ill forfeit so that other mine
thou wilt restore to be my comfort still
but thou wilt not nor he will not be free
for thou art covetous and he is kind
he learnd but surety-like to write for me
under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
the statute of thy beauty thou wilt take
thou usurer that putst forth all to use
and sue a friend came debtor for my sake
so him i lose through my unkind abuse.
him have i lost thou hast both him and me
he pays the whole and yet am i not free.

sonnet g
shall i compare thee to a summers day
thou art more lovely and more temperate.
rough winds do shake the darling buds of may
and summers lease hath all too short a date.
sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines
and often is his gold complexion dimmed
and every fair from fair sometime declines
by chance or natures changing course untrimmed
but thy eternal summer shall not fade
nor lose possession of that fair thou owst
nor shall death brag thou wandrest in his shade
when in eternal lines to time thou growst.
so long as men can breathe or eyes can see
so long lives this and this gives life to thee.

sonnet h
let me not to the marriage of true minds
admit impediments. love is not love
which alters when it alteration finds
or bends with the remover to remove
o no it is an ever-fixed mark
that looks on tempests and is never shaken
it is the star to every wandering bark
whose worths unknown although his height be taken.
loves not times fool though rosy lips and cheeks
within his bending sickles compass come
love alters not with his brief hours and weeks
but bears it out even to the edge of doom.
if this be error and upon me proved
i never writ nor no man ever loved.


sonnet i
my mistress eyes are nothing like the sun
coral is far more red than her lips red
if snow be white why then her breasts are dun
if hairs be wires black wires grow on her head.
i have seen roses damaskd red and white
but no such roses see i in her cheeks
and in some perfumes is there more delight
than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
i love to hear her speak yet well i know
that music hath a far more pleasing sound
i grant i never saw a goddess go
my mistress when she walks treads on the ground
and yet by heaven i think my love as rare
as any she belied with false compare.


sonnet j
to me fair friend you never can be old
for as you were when first your eye i eyd
such seems your beauty still. three winters cold
have from the forests shook three summers pride
three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turnd
in process of the seasons have i seen
three april perfumes in three hot junes burnd
since first i saw you fresh which yet are green.
ah yet doth beauty like a dial-hand
steal from his figure and no pace perceivd
so your sweet hue which methinks still doth stand
hath motion and mine eye may be deceivd
for fear of which hear this thou age unbred
ere you were born was beautys summer dead.
